docs(rfc): units for typography and layout (#246)
razorpay/blade: rfcs/2021-19-02-units-for-typography-and-layout.md

4. **Everything `dp`(native)**
   1. Changing device font size changes the font size of the content.
   2. Changing device font size doesn't changes the layout size.
   3. Image when device font-size is largest `@1x`
   <img alt="Layout dp 1x" src="./images/unit-layout-dp-1x.png" width="300px">

   4. Image when device font-size is largest `@3x`
   <img alt="Layout dp 3x" src="./images/unit-layout-dp-3x.png" width="300px">
5. **Tyography auto scale, layout pixel ratio(native)**
   1. Changing device font size changes the font size of the content.
   2. Changing device font size doesn't changes the layout size. Some layout breakages can happen as the text may end up being bigger than you expect in your layout.
   3. Things just look bigger if we use pixel ratio as a multiplicative factor as react native uses `dp` it automatically does those things for us.
   4. Image when device font-size is largest `@1x`
   <img alt="Layout pr 1x" src="./images/unit-layout-pr-1x.png" width="300px">

   5. Image when device font-size is largest `@3x`
   <img alt="Layout pr 3x" src="./images/unit-layout-pr-3x.png" width="300px">

> ### Absolute unit vs relative unit matrix

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Absolute unit vs relative unit matrix (on changing base font size)
```

Or something better to clarify what the "changes" are for in the following table.

Author: umm, it's not just because of change in base font size this matrix also dictates about page zoom.

| ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ---------- | ------ | ---------------------------------------- |
| [Primer - GitHub](https://primer.style/css/support/spacing)                              | px         | px     | NA                                       |
| [Spectrum - Adobe](https://react-spectrum.adobe.com/react-spectrum/getting-started.html) | px         | px     | revisitng decision                       |
| [Braid - Seek](https://seek-oss.github.io/braid-design-system/)                          | px         | px     | revisiting decision                      |
| [Styled System](https://styled-system.com/)                                              | px         | px     | default px, can change by suffixing unit |
| [Facebook](https://twitter.com/naman34/status/1362626358539481090)                       | rems       | px     | NA                                       |
| [Chakra](https://chakra-ui.com/docs/getting-started)                                     | rems       | rems   | default rems, option for other units     |

> >📝 Note: Couldn't find anything similar for react native

Reviewer: In case you want to explore:

- [Wix](https://github.com/wix/react-native-ui-lib)
- [Ant](https://github.com/ant-design/ant-design-mobile-rn)
- [Fluent](https://github.com/microsoft/fluentui-react-native)

### What will work for us?
Looking at the POC and the [matrix](#absolute-unit-vs-relative-unit-matrix), relative units looks no brainer but it has some downsides too:
* Assume we have few responsive layouts then increasing the font-size on desktop might trigger the media queries to kick in and because of that our layout will be re-arranged assuming that the screen size has changed. Now the user was just intending to increase the font-size but they got tricked into different layout since everything is relative which impacts their experience.

> * Since everything is relative, increase in font-size is identical to page zoom so the intent of the user to increase the content size goes for a toss.

Reviewer: Isn't this fine? Even for a page zoom, if there isn't enough room in the UI to layout as a "dektop" design the UI will update to a "mobile" design?

Author: so assume if your intent was just the content zoom but not the layout zoom so this defeats that as by zooming in you are just scaling the layout(it's like magnifier). 

On a side note page zoom doesn't triggers media queries it just scales things and the rendering engine doesn't kicks in at all.

1. Whether the content is accessible when the user changes the default font size of the browser/device ✅
2. Whether the content is accessible when the user zooms in/out on the browser ✅
3. Whether the interface is able to render on different screen sizes, pixel densities etc ✅

## How will we store and use it?
<img alt="storing and getting tokens" src="./images/unit-storing-and-getting.png" width="1200px">

* While storing we can compute the value in `px/dp` and store it in a unitless way. While rendering we can attach the units.
   ```js
   const space = {
      1: 8,
      2: 12,
      3: 16,
   }
   const fontSize = {
      1: 14,
      2: 18,
      3: 24,
   }
   ```
* With the above approach we can keep the vocabulary consistent that everything is stored in `px` for web and `dp` for react native  but while rendering the respective platforms(web/react-native) attaches the unit for the target rendering engine.
* We will implement a generic funtion that will attach the units to the tokens.
* For typography the units that'll be constructed will be relative(`rems` for web and `autoScale` value on text enabled for react-native apps).

> * For layout i.e height, width, padding, margin the units that'll be constructed will be absolute i.e `px`(pixels) for web and `dp` for react-native apps but with device pixel ratio to ensure consistency with various screen densities.

Reviewer 2: > `dp` for react-native apps but with device pixel ratio to ensure consistency with various screen densities.

I though we are just attaching `dp` and not taking `PixelRatio` into account anymore based on https://github.com/razorpay/blade/pull/246/files#diff-e1764707dceb6b254a8543b8f0578996940d0001820faea450cd29911623f110R520.

Author: Good catch because of back and forth I forgot to change this based on final conclusion 😄

# Drawbacks/Constraints
- Vocabulary is the biggest drawback. Thinking and visualising in relative units is difficult compared to absolute units like pixels(`px`) or density independent pixels(`dp`) but we can work it out with the help of tools. We can think and store in pixels but render in relative units of the target platform(`rems` for web and `dp` with device pixel ratio for react-native apps).

# Alternatives
- Here's the [absolute unit vs relative unit matrix](#absolute-unit-vs-relative-unit-matrix) which states all the altternatives with the details.

# Adoption strategy

> - **For developers** - All these decisions shouldn't matter, as this will be stored in our tokens as an abstraction. The end consumers will just use the typography and layout scale tokens for their purpose and not the actual values.

Reviewer: How will people figure out which value to use from the scale (without manual calculations in head or checking against the token values)? Say if Figma shows, 32px spacing in between two cards. Would we be able to solve this with some Figma configs / plugins, etc.?

Author: So once the Figma is all set people will see the actual token scale name in the inspector on Figma. So that'll help us to avoid all these confusion as devs will just care to look at what scale value they need to pick instead of the actual px/dp value

- Migration of existing projects is out of the scope of this RFC since that will be a breaking change.
- **For Designers** - All the designs shall be created `@1x` and the assets(images) shall be exported `@2x`, `@3x` accordingly. The standard artboard size for mobile is `360x640` for android and `375x677` for iPhone.
- **For Designers** - When doing visual QA of any design which is implemented the comparision cannot be done by keeping the screenshot from device side by side with the design implemented `@1x`. That'll always give wrong comparision results.

- We should have a different scale for each platform (mainly web & mobile) we are designing for instead of having a singular scale that accommodate all devices.

# Open Questions

> 1. Browser zoom and browser font size behave differently? Couldn't figure out what does browser zoom does differently like what css props does it changes so in order to have parity we need to mimic it?

Reviewer: Zoom just seems to "stretch" the actual hardware pixels. [Ref](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/29390155/what-exactly-changes-in-the-css-rendering-when-desktop-browsers-zoom-in-or-out)

Author: Thanks for this one 🙌

   <img alt="Browser font size change" src="./images/unit-browser-font-size.png" width="700px">

   <img alt="Browser zoom" src="./images/unit-browser-zoom.png" width="700px">

2. Design tokens for cross platforms(react for web, react native for apps) which means the typography and spacing scale needs to be stored in a unitless fashion?
   * Yes. we'll store things as unitless in tokens

> 3. Couldn't find what does WCAG says about this exactly? For eg: it just says the content should be readable at 200% zoom - [WCAG Guideline](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Understanding/resize-text.html)

Reviewer: What I'm able to understand - we should try to support upto 200% increase in content size, above that we need not try to support because above 200% user can get better results using an assistive technology (magnifier, etc.)

4. React Native equivalent for rem?
   * There's no equivalent. React Native is unitless and everything is considerd as `dp`

> 5. The layout and typography scale for web and react native has to be differnt?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
5. The layout and typography scale for web and react native has to be different?
```

>    * Probably yes. Because resolution on mobile are becoming denser and the area is still the same which means if we keep things on mobile comparatively bigger to it's desktop counterparts it'll yield better results. [Spectrum](https://spectrum.adobe.com/page/platform-scale/#Proportions) did a user reasearch and came up with desktop to mobile ratio of `1:1.25` i.e on mobile, things are 25% bigger compared to desktop.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   * Probably yes. Because resolution on mobile are becoming denser and the area is still the same which means if we keep things on mobile comparatively bigger to it's desktop counterparts it'll yield better results. [Spectrum](https://spectrum.adobe.com/page/platform-scale/#Proportions) did a user research and came up with desktop to mobile ratio of `1:1.25` i.e on mobile, things are 25% bigger compared to desktop.
```

* [Compare device's width, height, ppi](https://www.mydevice.io/#compare-devices)
* [How device pixel ratio is calculated for web](https://www.html5rocks.com/en/mobile/high-dpi/)
* [How device pixel ratio is calculated for native apps](https://www.perfecto.io/blog/how-mobile-screen-size-resolution-and-ppi-screen-affect-test-coverage)
* [Understanding Device Resolution for Web Design and Development](https://medium.com/@flik185/understanding-device-resolution-for-web-design-and-development-3bb4a5183478)
* [Pixel density on native apps](https://material.io/design/layout/pixel-density.html)
* [Designing for multiple screen densities on Android](https://developerlife.com/2018/07/21/designing-for-multiple-screen-densities-on-android/)
* [Build responsive React Native views for any device and support orientation change](https://medium.com/react-native-training/build-responsive-react-native-views-for-any-device-and-support-orientation-change-1c8beba5bc23)
* [iPhone Resolutions](https://www.paintcodeapp.com/news/ultimate-guide-to-iphone-resolutions)

> # Lesser known facts

Reviewer: Should we move this section before the detailed discussion? Would be easier for people to follow the reasoning if they don't know these points.

### How things render on native apps(React Native)
On react native we write things in unitless format which is nothing but `dp` and when it gets rendered the respective platform(iOS/android) handles the conversion to actual hardware pixels based on screen resolution and densities so we don't need to explicitly do anything for it.

Example:

Device Pixels for iPhone7 - `750x1334`(resolution) = `750` width and `1334` height

Pixel ratio - 2

so,

_Density independent pixel(width) = 750/2 = 375_

_Density independent pixel(height) = 1334/2 = 667_

That's the reason we design at `@1x`. So when we define width and height as `375px` and `667px` and then when it gets rendered on a screen with device pixel ratio as `2` the platforms scale everything up if we use the `dp` as units

_Device Pixel(width) = 375*2 = 750_

_Device Pixel(height) = 667*2 = 1334_

**How is device pixel ratio calculated?**

_Device Pixel Ratio = ppi/160_

For iphone7 the ppi is 326

so,

_Device Pixel Ratio = 326/160 = 2.03 rounded to 2_

> > ❓ Where did 160 came from in the denominator? It's a magic number and is standardised based on some calculations. Check the [detailed explanation here](https://developer.android.com/training/multiscreen/screendensities)

Reviewer 3: Is this same for iOS?

Author: yes

2. `padding: 1rem` - rems always takes base value as font-size of the browser regardless of the property they are used on. In this example 1rem = 16px so `padding: 16px`.
3. `1dp = 1px` at `360x640` and `160ppi`(a.k.a `@1x`), therefore `1dp = 3px` at `1080x1920` and `440ppi`(a.k.a `@3x`).

# Detailed Design
For anything to be rendered on the screen it needs to have a space on the screen and that space needs to have a measurable unit for the rendering engine to understand how to organise things on the screen.

The styling properties that require units are:
1. Typography
   * `font-size`
   * `line-height`
2. Layout
   1. Space
      * `padding` - top, right, bottom, left
      * `margin` - top, right, bottom, left
   2. Size
      * `height` - height, min-height, max-height
      * `width` - width, min-width, max-width

## Screen resolutions and densities
One of the main goal for layouts and content on the screen is that they should adapt to different screen resolutions and densities and things should still visually appear the same. Now what are some different factors that affect this?

### Aspect Ratio

> Aspect ratio is basically `width/height` of a screen i.e find ratios with the greatest common divisor

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Aspect ratio is basically `width/height` of a screen i.e ratio of width to height
```

Examples:

> 800x600 = 4:3
> 
> 1024x768 = 4:3
> 
> 1920x1200 = 16:10
> 
> 3840x2160 = 16:9

Reviewer: ```suggestion
800/600 = 4:3

1024/768 = 4:3

1920/1200 = 16:10

3840/2160 = 16:9
```

### PPI
PPI is short for pixels per inch which says the number of pixels that can be accommodated in 1 sq inch on the screen. 

PPI plays a signficant role of how things are physically rendered on the screen

How is PPI calculated? **`area of screen/resolution`**

Example:

_Area of **20"** Screen: **20.5x12.5=256 sq.in**_

_Screen Resolution: **1920*1080 = 2073600 (21600 inches)**_

> _PPI: **21600/256 = 84ppi**_

Reviewer: The math still seems confusing to me. Might be good idea to just link to a PPI calculator here instead of deriving things. Also the numbers don't seem to match with some online calculators I tried to understand the calculations, for example [this one](https://www.sven.de/dpi/).

Author: Sure I've updated it.
